Many parasites are known to modulate the phenotype of their hosts, which can work to increase parasite’s transmission (Poulin 1995, 2010). Manipulation mechanisms include direct changes in gene expression, or immune, neural and endocrine alterations (Poulin et al. 2022 and references therin). However, parasite-induced phenotypic manipulation per se is variable, and individual host-parasite interactions do not necessarily result in fixed outcomes (Poulin et al. 2022). Recently, host- and parasite-associated microbial communities (microbiomes) have started to be considered as potential modulators in the phenotypic change induced by parasites in their hosts (Dheilly et al. 2015; Poulin et al. 2022). Under this umbrella, this research project will use amphipods and their parasites as a model to investigate the potential role of associated microbes in parasite-induced phenotypic alterations.

The microbiome of T. serrulata, of the cestodes and of the acanthocephalan remains to be characterised, and the potential influence of microbes in host-parasite interactions leading to colour variation is still unknown. Thus, this research will fill in this gap, with the mission to assess the role of the microbiome in the phenotypic variability of the amphipod T. serrulata parasitised with acanthocephalans and cestodes, in comparison with uninfected amphipods. Specifically, the objectives of this research projects are:

To classify the phenotype of cestode-parasitised, acanthocephalan-parasitised, and uninfected amphipods.
To characterise the microbiome of cestode-parasitised, acanthocephalan-parasitised, and uninfected amphipods, as well as of the cestode and the acanthocephalan parasites.
To test for association among microbiome composition, amphipod phenotype, and infection state (cestode-infected, acanthocephalan-infected, or uninfected).
